[DOCS][ADRENO] Improved Adreno documentation (#13867)
apache/tvm: docs/how_to/deploy/adreno.rst

Introduction
------------

Adreno™ is a series of graphics processing unit (GPU) semiconductor
intellectual property cores developed by Qualcomm and used in many of
their SoCs.

The Adreno™ GPU accelerates the rendering of complex geometries to
deliver high-performance graphics and a rich user experience with low
power consumption.

TVM supports deep learning acceleration on Adreno™ GPU by native OpenCL backend of TVM and
also through OpenCLML backend. Native OpenCL backend of TVM is enhanced to make it
Adreno™ friendly by incorporating texture memory usage and Adreno™ friendly layouts.
OpenCLML is an SDK release by Qualcomm that provides kernel acceleration library
for most of the deep learning operators.

This guide is organized to demonstrate various design aspects of

- :ref:`OpenCL Backend Ehnahcements<opencl_enhancements>`
- :ref:`About OpenCLML<about_openclml>`
- :ref:`Build and Deploy<build_deploy>`

.. how to :ref:`build TVM with OpenCL<building_tvm_for_adreno>` (needed by Adreno™ devices) and TVM RPC
.. enabled. It will also provide :ref:`example code<build_and_deploy_model_for_adreno>` to better understand the differences in compiling and deploying models

> .. for Adreno™ devices.

Author: Do you still see this ? It looks fine in local .

> .. for Adreno™ devices.

Reviewer: If you speak about how the references looks like, then yes. But as far as I understand, it is just the problems of the github representation. I took a look into other rst doc files and all references looks there in the same way. Originally, my comment was about the text:
```
.. how to :ref:`build TVM with OpenCL<building_tvm_for_adreno>` (needed by Adreno™ devices) and TVM RPC
.. enabled. It will also provide :ref:`example code<build_and_deploy_model_for_adreno>` to better understand the differences in compiling and deploying models
.. for Adreno™ devices.
```
But for now the document was significantly reworked and this comment is not relevant.

Overall, with textures, it is possible to achieve a significant performance boost
compared to OpenCL buffer based solutions.

In general we specify target as ``target="opencl"`` for a regular OpenCL based target which generates the kernels as shown below.

.. code:: c

   __kernel void tvmgen_default_fused_nn_conv2d_kernel0(__global float* restrict p0, __global double* restrict p1, __global float* restrict conv2d_nhwc) {
   // body..

Above OpenCL kernel definition has ``__global float*`` poniters which are essestially OpenCL ``buffer``  objects.

When enabled texture based enhancements by modifying target definition as ``target="opencl -device=adreno"`` we can see the generated
kernels using texture backed OpenCL image objects as shown below.

.. code:: c

   __kernel void tvmgen_default_fused_nn_conv2d_kernel0(__write_only image2d_t pad_temp_global_texture, __read_only image2d_t p0) {
   // body..

*image2d_t* is a built-in OpenCL types that represents two-dimensional image object and provides several additional functions.

> When we use *image2d_t* we read *4 elements at one time*, and it helps to utilize hardware in a more efficient way.

Reviewer: Absolutely the same text is in the section `Generated Source Inspection`. Probably you can paraphrase text in the section `Generated Source Inspection` or remove it.

Author: Removed in later part.

running on the host.

Hence, for RPC based setup we will have above components running on host and target device. Below sections explain how to setup the same
manually and also inside docker using automated tools.

**Automated RPC Setup:**
Here we will explain how to setup RPC in docker environment.

Below command launches tracker in docker environment, where tracker listens on port 9190.

::

   ./tests/scripts/ci.py adreno -i # Launch a new shell on the anreno docker
   source  tests/scripts/setup-adreno-env.sh -e tracker -p 9190

Now, the below comand can run TVM RPC on remote android device with id "abcdefgh".

::

   ./tests/scripts/ci.py adreno -i # Launch a new shell on adreno docker.
   source  tests/scripts/setup-adreno-env.sh -e device -p 9190 -d abcdefgh

**Manual RPC Setup:**

Please refer to the tutorial
`How To Deploy model on Adreno <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno.html>`_
for manual RPC environment setup.

This concludes RPC Setup and we have rpc-tracker available on host 127.0.0.1 (rpc-tracker) and port 9190 (rpc-port).

.. _commandline_interface:

Commandline Tools
-----------------

> Here we describe entire compilation process using command line tools. TVM has command line utility "tvmc" to perform

Reviewer 2: I completely agree that using of generic tool like tvmc is better than development of python script, on the other hand I have not seen that tvmc can convert model to fp16. While it is the must have feature for running of model on GPU/Adreno.

If tvmc cannot transform model to fp16, it's better not to promote it here

Author: fp16 is performance related aspect of Adreno and I think we should promote it.

```tvmc``` at the moment supports post processing (after import) only for ```BYOC``` target options. I was thinking of enhancing ```tvmc``` to allow vendor specific post processing before ```relay.build```.  

I think we can leave it this for now and rectify the same after ```tvmc``` changes.

What do you think ?

Reviewer 2: I would not promote tvmc in adreno flow until it support conversion to fp16.

If you are planning to add such kind of support, let's postpone these changes until tvmc get this support.

I.e. I propose to modify "Deploy" section without mentioning of tvmc.

In other case it will be formally correct, such steps are easy and clear but useless. No one will deploy fp32 on GPU.

Author: I think ```tvmc``` command line way helps new developers a lot. hence, I worked on enhancing tvmc to support pre and post processing hooks https://github.com/apache/tvm/pull/14010

**Deploy & Run on Target:**

Running the compiled model on Android target is possible in RPC way as well as native deployment.

We can use below tvmc command to deploy on remore target via RPC based setup.

::

   python3 -m tvm.driver.tvmc run --device="cl" keras-resnet50.tar \
   --rpc-key android --rpc-tracker 127.0.0.1:9190 --print-time

tvmc based run has more option to initialize the input in various modes line fill, random ..etc.

TVM also supports "rtvm" tool to run the model narively on ADB shell. The build process produced this tool under build-adreno-target.
Please refer to `rtvm <https://github.com/apache/tvm/tree/main/apps/cpp_rtvm>`_ for more details about this tool.

.. _python_interface:

This section explains importing, auto tuning, compiling and running a model using python interface.\
TVM has a high level interface through tvmc abstraction as well as relay api. We will discuss about both of these in details.

Unlike command line interface python interface starts with model importing. Model importing converts the models from any framework

> to a relay module. Relay module will be used across the auto tuning, compilation stages.

Reviewer: It looks like this text should be under section `TVMC Interface`. Am I right?

Reviewer: Ok, fine but in this case this piece of text should be moved to the section `TVMC Interface` which is below.

**TVMC Interface:**

TVMC interface can be accessed as shown below to import, compile and run a model. Please refer to the tutorial for the same
`How To Deploy model on Adreno using TVMC <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.html>`_

tvmc compiled package can be used for native deploy also using "rtvm" utility.

Also, please refer to tvmc documentation for more details about the api interface.

**Relay Interface:**

Relay api interface gives lower level api access to the tvm compiler interface.
Relay interface follows tvmc kind of a flow where we produce TVM module first followed by auto tuning, compilation and deployment.

Please refer to the tutorial `How To Deploy model on Adreno <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno.html>`_
for a step by step explanation of the same.

.. _application_integration:

> Aplication Integration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Application Integration:
```

To build TVM with OpenCLML SDK we need export the OpenCLML SDK as shown below while building

::

   export ADRENO_OPENCL=<Path to OpenCLML SDK>
   ./tests/scripts/ci.py adreno -i

On successful compilation this leaves us into a docker shell. The build leaves two folders

* build-adreno:  The host side TVM compiler build.
* build-adreno-target : Contains the android target components

    * libtvm_runtime.so : TVM runtime library
    * tvm_rpc : The rpc runtime environment tool
    * rtvm : A native stand alone tool

While using docker environment the android device is shared with host. Hence, it is required
to have adb version "1.0.41" on the host as the docker used the same version.

We can check adb devices availability inside docker environment too.

::

   user@ci-adreno-fpeqs:~$ adb devices
   List of devices attached
   aaaabbbb	device
   ccccdddd	device

.. _manual_setup:

Development Environment Setup : Manual
--------------------------------------

Manual build process require building of host and target components.

Below command will configure the build the host compiler

::

   mkdir -p build
   cd build
   cp ../cmake/config.cmake .

>    echo set\(USE_OPENCL ON\) >> config.cmake

Author: Yep. Its optional.

   echo set\(USE_RPC ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_GRAPH_EXECUTOR ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_LIBBACKTRACE AUTO\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_LLVM ON\) >> config.cmake

Additionally we can push below config entry to compile with OpenCLML support.

::

   export ADRENO_OPENCL=<Path to OpenCLML SDK>

>    echo set\(USE_CLML ${ADRENO_OPENCL}\) >> config.cmake

Author: Yep, this is required to know the CLML SDK version details.

In detail, CLML might add new operators as the version progress. CLML front end should know this to decide on the operators to be offloaded.

now we can build as shown below

::

   cmake ..
   make

Finally we can export python path as

::

>    export PYTHONPATH=$PWD:/python

Reviewer: Usually, I export `PYTHONPATH` in this way: `export PYTHONPATH=$TVM_HOME/python:${PYTHONPATH}`
I suppose that there is a typo here, because not sure that some modules exists in `/python`.

   python3 -c "import tvm" # Verify tvm python package

Now, we can configure and build the target components with below configuration
Target build require Android NDK to be installed.

- Read documentation about *Android NDK installation* here: https://developer.android.com/ndk
- To get access to adb tools you can see *Android Debug Bridge installation* here: https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb

::

   mkdir -p build-adreno
   cd build-adreno
   cp ../cmake/config.cmake .

>    echo set\(USE_MICRO OFF\) >> config.cmake

Reviewer: I believe that after #13503 this flag is redundant.

   echo set\(USE_OPENCL ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_RPC ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_CPP_RPC ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_CPP_RTVM ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_GRAPH_EXECUTOR ON\) >> config.cmake
   echo set\(USE_LIBBACKTRACE AUTO\) >> config.cmake

>    echo set\(USE_KALLOC_ALIGNMENT 32\) >> config.cmake

Reviewer: Never used this flag before. What is the reason of using this flag here?

Author: This was due to zero copy incompatibility for Adreno target with 64 bit alignment.

More details https://github.com/apache/tvm/pull/13413 and https://github.com/apache/tvm/pull/13307

Reviewer: Probably explanation comment will be useful for the user to understand why he/she should pass some cmake options such as `USE_LIBBACKTRACE` or `USE_KALLOC_ALIGNMENT`. What do you think?

Adreno, including selection of precision, running the inference of the
model, getting the predictions, and measuring the performance please refer to this tutorial: `How To Deploy model on Adreno <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno.html>`_
::

|Android deployment pipeline|
   cmake -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE="${ANDROID_NDK_HOME}/build/cmake/android.toolchain.cmake" \
      -DANDROID_ABI=arm64-v8a \
      -DANDROID_PLATFORM=android-28 \
      -DCMAKE_SYSTEM_VERSION=1 \
      -DCMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH="${ADRENO_OPENCL}" \
      -DCMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_PROGRAM=NEVER \
      -DCMAKE_FIND_ROOT_PATH_MODE_LIBRARY=ONLY \
      -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="${ANDROID_NDK_HOME}/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/linux-x86_64/bin/aarch64-linux-android28-clang++" \
      -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="${ANDROID_NDK_HOME}/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/linux-x86_64/bin/aarch64-linux-android28-clang" \
      -DMACHINE_NAME="aarch64-linux-gnu" ..

*Fig.2 Deployment pipeline on Adreno devices*
   make tvm_runtime tvm_rpc rtvm

The figure above demonstrates a generalized pipeline for deploying and running neural network models on android devices.

> As can be seen from the figure, the compiled model has a set_input() and a run() methods,

Author: Yep, It should be there I will refine and bring it back.

> As can be seen from the figure, the compiled model has a set_input() and a run() methods,

Author: https://github.com/tlc-pack/web-data/pull/22

Improved the pipeline diagram here . Please comment.

> RPC Setup

Reviewer: I think that `RPC Setup` is described in `deploy_model_on_adreno.py`. Probably we can remove this section from here and move new parts to the `deploy_model_on_adreno.py`? It will help to keep the structure of this document as a brief overview w/o many details.

Author: Makes sense. I will improve here.

    # Hence, reroute connections to these ports on host to remore device.
    adb forward tcp:5000 tcp:5000
    adb forward tcp:5001 tcp:5001
    adb forward tcp:5002 tcp:5002
    # Finally launch rpc_daemon on remote device with identity key as "android"
    adb shell "cd /data/local/tmp/tvm_test; killall -9 tvm_rpc; sleep 2; LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/data/local/tmp/tvm_test/ ./tvm_rpc server --host=0.0.0.0 --port=5000 --port-end=5010 --tracker=127.0.0.1:9120 --key=android"

Upon successfull running this remote device will be available on tracker which can be queried as below.

::

   python3 -m tvm.exec.query_rpc_tracker --port 9120
   Tracker address 127.0.0.1:9120
   Server List
   ------------------------------
   server-address           key
   ------------------------------
       127.0.0.1:5000    server:android
   ------------------------------

   Queue Status
   -------------------------------
   key       total  free  pending
   -------------------------------
   android   1      1     0
   -------------------------------

This concludes RPC Setup and we have rpc-tracker available on host 127.0.0.1 (rpc-tracker) and port 9120 (rpc-port).

.. _commandline_interface:

> Commandline Tools

Reviewer: Probably we can move this part to the `deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.py` and just keep here a brief description and link to the `deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.py`?

Author: ```deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.py``` is about using tvmc from python API interface. This is invoking tvmc from python shell.

Reviewer: Got it, thank you! What about referencing to [this](https://tvm.apache.org/docs/tutorial/tvmc_command_line_driver.html?highlight=tvmc) documentation?
I like that there is pretty brief instruction about using `tvmc` for Adreno. But we can give a link to this document and the user can learn more about `tvmc`.

We can use below tvmc command to deploy on remore target via RPC based setup.

::

   python3 -m tvm.driver.tvmc run --device="cl" keras-resnet50.tar \
   --rpc-key android --rpc-tracker 127.0.0.1:9120 --print-time

tvmc based run has more option to initialize the input in various modes line fill, random ..etc.

TVM also supports "rtvm" tool to run the model narively on ADB shell. The build process produced this tool under build-adreno-target.
Please refer to `rtvm <https://github.com/apache/tvm/tree/main/apps/cpp_rtvm>`_ for more details about this tool.

.. _python_interface:

This section explains importing, auto tuning, compiling and running a model using python interface.\
TVM has a high level interface through tvmc abstraction as well as relay api. We will discuss about both of these in details.

Unlike command line interface python interface starts with model importing. Model importing converts the models from any framework
to a relay module. Relay module will be used across the auto tuning, compilation stages.

**TVMC Interface:**

TVMC interface can be accessed as shown below to import, compile and run a model. Please refer to the tutorial for the same

> `How To Deploy model on Adreno using TVMC <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.html>`_

Author: Here, tvmc python usage is pointed to the docs.

to initialize the input in various modes like fill, random ..etc.

``tvmc`` based deployment generally a quick verification of compiled model on target from remote host via RPC setup.

Production generally uses native deploymenmt environment like Android JNI or CPP native environments.
Here we need to use cross compiled ``tvm_runtime`` interface to deploy the tvm compilation output, i.e. ``TVMPackage``.

TVM has a standalone tool ``rtvm`` to deploy and run the model natively on ADB shell. The build process produces this tool under build-adreno-target.
Please refer to `rtvm <https://github.com/apache/tvm/tree/main/apps/cpp_rtvm>`_ for more details about this tool.

While integrating inside existing Android application TVM has multiple options. For JNI or CPP native we may use `C Runtime API <https://github.com/apache/tvm/blob/main/include/tvm/runtime/c_runtime_api.h>`_
You may refer to ``rtvm``'s simplified interface `TVMRunner <https://github.com/apache/tvm/blob/main/apps/cpp_rtvm/tvm_runner.h>`_ also.

Additionally, TVM also supports Java interface through `TVM4J <https://github.com/apache/tvm/tree/main/jvm>`_

> .. _python_interface:

Reviewer: It looks like some section name should be after this anchor, isn't it?

Reviewer: Didn't get why it was resolved? Here is an `anchor` to `python_interface` but below it is no any section name, just some description.

Author: Got it.

This section explains importing, auto tuning, compiling and running a model using python interface.\
TVM has a high level interface through ``tvmc`` abstraction as well as low level relay api. We will discuss about both of these in details.

**TVMC Interface:**

While using ``tvmc`` python interface we first load a model that produces ``TVMCModel``. ``TVMCModel`` will be used for Auto Tuning to produce tuning cache.
Compilation process uses ``TVMCModel`` and tuning cache (optional) to produce ``TVMCPackage``. Now, ``TVMCPackage`` will be saved to file system or
can be used to deploy and run on target device.

Please refer to the tutorial for the same
`How To Deploy model on Adreno using TVMC <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno_tvmc.html>`_

Saved ``TVMCPackage`` can be used for native deployment using ``rtvm`` utility too.

> Also, please refer to `tvmc <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/tutorial/tvmc_command_line_driver.html?highlight=tvmc>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, please refer to `tvmc <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/tutorial/tvmc_command_line_driver.html>`_
```

>  documentation for more details about the api interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documentation for more details about the api interface.
```

Overall, with textures, it is possible to achieve a significant performance boost
compared to OpenCL buffer based solutions.

.. _about_openclml:

About OpenCLML
--------------

OpenCLML is a SDK released by Qualcomm that provides accelerated deep learning operators.
These operators are exposed as an extension "cl_qcom_ml_ops" to standard OpenCL specification.
Please refer `Accelerate your models with our OpenCL ML SDK <https://developer.qualcomm.com/blog/accelerate-your-models-our-opencl-ml-sdk>`_ for more details.

OpenCLML is integrated into TVM as a `BYOC <https://tvm.apache.org/docs/dev/how_to/relay_bring_your_own_codegen.html?highlight=bring%20your%20own>`_ solution.

> OpenCLML operators can use same context and the operatrors can be enqueued on same command queue if native OpenCL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenCLML operators can use same context and can be enqueued on same command queue as used in native OpenCL.
```

We took advantage of this to avoid any context switching over heads while fallback to native OpenCL.

.. _build_deploy:

> TVM for Adreno™

Reviewer: Originally, this document was designed to be a brief introduction to the Adreno usage in TVM. And details related to deployment were described here: https://tvm.apache.org/docs/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_android.html
One of the benefit of `deploy_model_on_android` document was that user was able to run this script locally with python and run an example on his android. You have removed a link to this document.

Also, this `rst` document starts to be much bigger.  And it is more difficult to get quickly some basic knowledge about Adreno. Previously, section `Build and deploy model for Adreno` briefly showed the peculiarities of the Adreno compilation. For example, differences in the generated kernels with `opencl` and `opencl --device=adreno` and also some information about mixed precision.

My suggestions are:
1. Extent `Building TVM for Adreno` section by the information about building from docker container.
2. For sections about running model on the device and using CLML, create a new doc file or update [deploy_model_on_adreno](https://github.com/apache/tvm/blob/main/gallery/how_to/deploy_models/deploy_model_on_adreno.py)

@srkreddy1238 what do you think about it? I would like to keep this `rst` file as a brief introduction to Adreno and all details move to the `gallery/how_to/deploy_models`.

Author: Missed the deploy models part. I will restore it.

Earlier the doc was more texture enhancement centric (too technical). Objective here is to simplify it in a way that a new user will have a good start with TVM and Adreno.

Thanks for the suggestions, it make sense to separate theory and sample code. I will rearrange the same. Feel free to review and advice I want multiple opinions to perfect the docs.

Reviewer: > Earlier the doc was more texture enhancement centric (too technical).

It was a try to highlight and explain benefits and technical aspects of Adreno. I'll be happy if after reworking, the document is more helpful and friendly for new users.

To leverage the GPU hardware capabilities and utilize the benefits of half precision computation and memory management,
we can convert an original model having floating points operation to a model operating with half precision.
Choosing lower precision will positively affect the performance of the model, but it may also have a decrease in the accuracy of the model.

To do the conversion you need to call adreno specific transformation API as soon relay module is generated through any frontend:

.. code:: python

   from tvm.relay.op.contrib import adreno

>    adreno.convert_to_dtype(mod["main"], "float16")

Reviewer 2: this is syntax sugar, we need to mention here that tvm.relay.op.contrib.adreno.convert_to_dtype is implemented through ToMixedPrecision pass
